doc/doxygen: add creating boards doc (#13257)
RIOT-OS/RIOT: doc/doxygen/src/creating-boards.md

# Creating boards                                             {#creating-boards}

At some point you might need to port a new `BOARD` to `RIOT`, either because
that specific development board is not yet supported or because you have a
custom `BOARD` for your project.

> If you want to port a `BOARD` to `RIOT` you will have two choices, doing it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to port a `BOARD` to `RIOT` you have two choices: doing it
```

> inside of `RIOTBASE` or outside. In which ever case the file structure will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
inside of `RIOTBASE` or outside. In either case the file structure
```

> be basically the same and moving from one to another is easy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is basically the same and moving from one to another is easy.
```

> This guide will go into the generic structure you need to add a new `BOARD`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This guide goes into the generic structure you need to add a new `BOARD`
```

to `RIOT`, the different files as well as their functionality.

> _note_: we will assume here that your `CPU` and `CPU_MODEL` is already supported

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_note_: we assume here that your `CPU` and `CPU_MODEL` is already supported
```

in `RIOT` so no peripheral or cpu implementation is needed.

## General structure                                        {#general-structure}

Like @ref creating-an-application "applications" or @ref creating-modules

> "modules", boards will consist on a directory containing source files and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
"modules", boards consist on a directory containing source files and
```

> makefiles. Usually a `BOARD` directory will have the following structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
makefiles. Usually a `BOARD` directory has the following structure
```

```
  board-foo/
  |----dist/
      |----scripts
  |----board.c
  |----doc.txt

>   |----includes/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  |----include/
```

      |----periph_conf.h
      |----board.h
      |----gpio_params.h
  |----Makefile
  |----Makefile.dep
  |----Makefile.features
  |----Makefile.include
```

### Source files                                           {#board-source-files}

> Header files in `board-foo/include` will define physical mappings or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Header files in `board-foo/include` define physical mappings or
```

configurations. e.g:

- `periph_conf.h`: defines configurations and mappings for peripherals as well
  as clock configurations.
- `board.h`: holds board specific definitions or mappings, for examples leds,
  buttons. It might as well override default drivers parameters (e.g.: assigning
  specific pin connections to a lcd screen, radio, etc.). Some boards might also

>   define optimized `XTIMER_values` (e.g. @ref `XTIMER_BACKOFF`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  define optimized `xtimer` values (e.g. @ref `XTIMER_BACKOFF`).
```

- `gpio_params.h`: if the board supports @ref drivers_saul "SAUL" then its @ref
  `saul_gpio_params_t` will be define here.

> - other: other headers specificity needed by one `BOARD`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- other: other specific headers needed by one `BOARD`
```

_note_: header files do not need to be defined in `include/`, but if defined
        somewhere else then they must be added to the include path,

>         `INCLUDES += -I<some>/<directory>/<path>`

Reviewer: Add a mention that this should be added in the Makefile.include file ?

> Board initialization functions will be defined in `board.c`. THis file must at

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Board initialization functions are defined in `board.c`. This file must at
```

> least define a `board_init()` function that will be called at startup. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
least define a `board_init()` function that is called at startup. This
```

> function will initialize the `CPU` by calling`cpu_init()` among others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
function initializes the `CPU` by calling`cpu_init()` among others.
```

```c
void board_init(void)
{
    /* initialize the CPU core */
    cpu_init();

    /* initialize GPIO or others... */
    ...
}
```

### Makefiles

#### Makefile                                                        {#Makefile}

A board's Makefile just needs to include `Makefile.base` in the RIOT
repository and define the `MODULE` as `board` (see @ref creating-modules
"modules" for more details)

```mk
MODULE = board

include $(RIOTBASE)/Makefile.base
```

#### Makefile.dep                                                {#Makefile.dep}

Dependencies on other `MODULES` or `FEATURES` can be defined here. This might
specify `MODULES` or dependencies that need to be pulled under specific
configurations. e.g.: if your board has a sx1276 lora chip:

```mk
ifneq (,$(filter netdev_default,$(USEMODULE)))
  USEMODULE += sx1276
endif
```

> _Note_: that `Makefile.dep` is processed only once so you have to take care to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_Note_: that `Makefile.dep` is processed only once so you have to take care of
```

> add the dependency block for your board *before* your dependencies pull in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
adding the dependency block for your board *before* its dependencies pull in
```

their dependencies.

#### Makefile.features                                      {#Makefile.features}

> This file will define all the features provided by th BOARD. These features

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This file defines all the features provided by the BOARD. These features
```

> might also need to be supported by the `CPU`. Here you will also define the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
might also need to be supported by the `CPU`. Here, define the
```

`CPU` and `CPU_MODEL` (see @ref build-system-basics "build system basics" for
more details on these variables).

e.g.:

```mk
CPU = foo
CPU_MODEL = foobar

# Put defined MCU peripherals here (in alphabetical order)
FEATURES_PROVIDED += periph_i2c
FEATURES_PROVIDED += periph_spi
FEATURES_PROVIDED += periph_uart
```

#### Makefile.include                                        {#Makefile.include}

> This file will contain BSP or toolchain configurations for the `BOARD`. It

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This file contains BSP or toolchain configurations for the `BOARD`. It
```

should at least define the configuration needed for flashing (i.e. a
programmer) as well as the serial configuration (if one is available).

e.g.:

```mk
# Define the default port depending on the host OS
PORT_LINUX ?= /dev/ttyUSB0
PORT_DARWIN ?= $(firstword $(sort $(wildcard /dev/tty.usbserial*)))

# setup serial terminal
include $(RIOTMAKE)/tools/serial.inc.mk

# this board uses openocd
include $(RIOTMAKE)/tools/openocd.inc.mk
```

### doc.txt                                                         {#board-doc}

Although not explicitly needed, if upstreamed and as a general good

> practice, this file will hold all `BOARD` documentation. This can include

Reviewer: ```suggestion
practice, this file holds all `BOARD` documentation. This can include
```

datasheet reference, documentation on how to flash, etc.

The documentation must be under the proper doxygen group, you can compile the

> doc by calling `make doc` and opening the generated html file on any browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
doc by calling `make doc` and then open the generated html file on any browser.
```

```c
/**
@defgroup    boards_foo FooBoard
@ingroup     boards
@brief       Support for the foo board

### User Interface

  ....

### Using UART

  ...

### Flashing the device

  ...

*/
```

## Using Common code                                        {#common-board-code}

> To avoid code duplication common code across boards has been grouped in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To avoid code duplication, common code across boards has been grouped in
```

`boards/common`. e.g. `BOARD`s based on the same cpu (`boards/common/nrf52`) or
`BOARD`s having the same layout `boards/common/nucleo64`.

In the case of source files this means some functions like `board_init`

> will be defined in the common code. Unless having specific configurations or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be defined in the common code. Unless having specific configurations or
```

initialization you might not need a`board.c` or `board.h`. Another common use
case is common peripheral configurations:

```diff
-#include "cfg_timer_tim5.h"
+/**
+ * @name   Timer configuration
+ * @{
+ */
+static const timer_conf_t timer_config[] = {
+    {
+        .dev      = TIM5,
+        .max      = 0xffffffff,
+        .rcc_mask = RCC_APB1ENR_TIM5EN,
+        .bus      = APB1,
+        .irqn     = TIM5_IRQn
+    }
+};
+
+#define TIMER_0_ISR         isr_tim5
+
+#define TIMER_NUMOF         ARRAY_SIZE(timer_config)
+/** @} */

```

If you want to use common makefiles, include them at the end of the specific
`Makefile`, e.g. for a `Makefile.features`:

```mk
CPU = foo
CPU_MODEL = foobar

# Put defined MCU peripherals here (in alphabetical order)
FEATURES_PROVIDED += periph_i2c
FEATURES_PROVIDED += periph_spi
FEATURES_PROVIDED += periph_uart

include $(RIOTBOARD)/common/foo_common/Makefile.features
```

## Boards outside of RIOTBASE                      {#boards-outside-of-riotbase}

> All `BOARD`s in RIOT will reside in `RIOTBOARD` (`RIOTBOARD` being a make

Reviewer: ```suggestion
All `BOARD`s in RIOT reside in `RIOTBOARD` (`RIOTBOARD` being a make
```

variable set to `$(RIOTBOARD)/boards`).

> If one want's to use a `BOARD` outside of `RIOTBOARD` the way to go is setting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If one want's to use a `BOARD` outside of `RIOTBOARD`, the way to go is to set
```

> `BOARDSDIR` variable to the path of you directory holding your external

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the `BOARDSDIR` variable to the path to the directory holding your external
```

boards, e.g.: `BOARDSDIR=/home/external-boards/` (this would commonly be done
in your application `Makefile` or your environment).

```
/home/
|----RIOT/
    |---- ...
|----external-boards/
    |----board-foo/
        |----dist/
            |----scripts
        |----board.c
        |----doc.txt

>         |----includes/

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        |----include/
```

            |----periph_conf.h
            |----board.h
            |----gpio_params.h
        |----Makefile
        |----Makefile.dep
        |----Makefile.features
        |----Makefile.include
```

When defining boards outside of `RIOTBASE` some considerations must be taken
with the makefiles:

- `Makefile`

>   - `MODULE` must not be `board` since if inheriting of a board

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - `MODULE` cannot be `board`: if inheriting from a board
```

>   `foo-parent` then `foo-parent` will already define a `MODULE = board`, so

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  `foo-parent` then `foo-parent` already defines a `MODULE = board`, so
```

  use any other name, lets say `board-foo`.
  - Include the location of the parent `BOARD` to inherit from (if there is
    one):

```mk
      DIRS += $(RIOTBOARD)/foo-parent
```

- `Makefile.include`

>   - duplicate the include done by `$(RIOTBASE)/Makefile.include` to also

Reviewer: This is not clear

Author: I added an example

    include the parent board header.

> - `Makefile.dep`: `board` is added by default to `USEMODULE` but since we

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `Makefile.dep`: `board` is added by default to `USEMODULE` but since `board-foo`
```

>   defined a `board-foo` we must explicitly include it by adding

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  is defined, it must also be explicitly included by adding
```

  `USEMODULE += board-foo`.

> - Then simply include in each `Makefile.*` the parent `BOARD` file, just as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Then simply include in each `Makefile.*` the corresponding parent `BOARD` `Makefile.*`, just as
```

>   is done for common `BOARD` code as explained in @ref common-board-code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  it is done for common `BOARD` code as explained in @ref common-board-code.
```

All `BOARD`s in RIOT reside in `RIOTBOARD` (`RIOTBOARD` being a make variable
set to `$(RIOTBOARD)/boards`).

If one want's to use a `BOARD` outside of `RIOTBOARD`, the way to go is setting
the `BOARDSDIR` variable to the path to the directory containing your external
boards, e.g.: `BOARDSDIR=/home/external-boards/` (this would commonly be done
in your application `Makefile` or your environment).

```
/home/
|----RIOT/
    |---- ...
|----external-boards/
    |----board-foo/
        |----dist/
            |----scripts
        |----board.c
        |----doc.txt
        |----include/
            |----periph_conf.h
            |----board.h
            |----gpio_params.h
        |----Makefile
        |----Makefile.dep
        |----Makefile.features
        |----Makefile.include
```

When defining boards outside of `RIOTBASE` some considerations must be taken
with the makefiles:

- `Makefile`
  - `MODULE` cannot be `board`: if inheriting from a board `foo-parent`
    then `foo-parent` already defines a `MODULE = board`, so
    use any other name, lets say `board-foo`.
  - Include the location of the parent `BOARD` to inherit from (if there is

>     one):

Reviewer 3: I find it a bit confusing that at first this talks about boards outside of `RIOTBASE`, but then gives instructions on what do do if a board inherits from another one.
One does not necessitate the other, does it?

Author: Yes, I think you are right that those two cases might not be well differentiated, you can have:

- boards outside RIOTBASE
- boards outside RIOTBASE inheriting code from boards in RIOTBOARD, I'll try to re-phrase
